Ants are social insects of the family Formicidae and , along with the related wasps and bees , belong to the order Hymenoptera . 
Ants evolved from wasp-like ancestors in the mid-Cretaceous period between 110 and 130 million years ago and diversified after 
the rise of flowering plants . More than 12 ,500 out of an estimated total of 22 ,000 species have been classified . They are easily identified by 
their elbowed antennae and a distinctive node-like structure that forms a slender waist .

Ants form colonies that range in size from a few dozen predatory individuals living in small natural cavities to highly organised colonies that 
may occupy large territories and consist of millions of individuals . Larger colonies consist mostly of sterile wingless females forming castes 
of  " workers "  ,  " soldiers "  , or other specialised groups . Nearly all ant colonies also have some fertile males called  " drones "  and one or more 
fertile females called  " queens "  . The colonies sometimes are described as superorganisms because the ants appear to operate as a unified entity , 
collectively working together to support the colony .

Ants have colonised almost every landmass on Earth . The only places lacking indigenous ants are Antarctica and a few remote or inhospitable 
islands . Ants thrive in most ecosystems and may form 15–25% of the terrestrial animal biomass . Their success in so many environments has been 
attributed to their social organisation and their ability to modify habitats , tap resources , and defend themselves . Their long co-evolution 
with other species has led to mimetic , commensal , parasitic , and mutualistic relationships .

Ant societies have division of labour , communication between individuals , and an ability to solve complex problems . These parallels with 
human societies have long been an inspiration and subject of study . Many human cultures make use of ants in cuisine , medication , and rituals . 
Some species are valued in their role as biological pest control agents . Their ability to exploit resources may bring ants into conflict with 
humans , however , as they can damage crops and invade buildings . Some species , such as the red imported fire ant , are regarded as invasive 
species , establishing themselves in areas where they have been introduced accidentally .

Head
An ant's head contains many sensory organs . Like most insects , ants have compound eyes made from numerous tiny lenses attached together . 
Ant eyes are good for acute movement detection , but do not offer a high resolution image . They also have three small ocelli ( simple eyes ) 
on the top of the head that detect light levels and polarization . Compared to vertebrates , most ants have poor-to-mediocre eyesight and 
a few subterranean species are completely blind . Some ants such as Australia's bulldog ant , however , have excellent vision and are capable 
of discriminating the distance and size of objects moving nearly a metre away .
Two antennae (  " feelers "  ) are attached to the head; these organs detect chemicals , air currents , and vibrations; they also are used to transmit 
and receive signals through touch . The head has two strong jaws , the mandibles , used to carry food , manipulate objects , construct nests , and 
for defence . In some species a small pocket ( infrabuccal chamber ) inside the mouth stores food , so it may be passed to other ants or their 
larvae .

Legs
All six legs are attached to the mesosoma (  " thorax "  ) . A hooked claw at the end of each leg helps ants to climb and to hang onto surfaces .

Wings
Most queens and the small number of drones in a colony ( the male ants ) , have wings; queens shed the wings after the nuptial flight , 
leaving visible stubs , a distinguishing feature of queens . Wingless queens ( ergatoids ) and males occur in a few species , however .

Ants communicate with each other using pheromones , sounds , and touch . The use of pheromomes as chemical signals is more developed in 
ants than in other hymenopteran groups . Like other insects , ants perceive smells with their long , thin , and mobile antennae . 
The paired antennae provide information about the direction and intensity of scents . Since most ants live on the ground , 
they use the soil surface to leave pheromone trails that may be followed by other ants . In species that forage in groups , 
a forager that finds food marks a trail on the way back to the colony; this trail is followed by other ants , these ants then 
reinforce the trail when they head back with food to the colony . When the food source is exhausted , no new trails are marked 
by returning ants and the scent slowly dissipates . This behaviour helps ants deal with changes in their environment . 
For instance , when an established path to a food source is blocked by an obstacle , the foragers leave the path to explore new routes . 
If an ant is successful , it leaves a new trail marking the shortest route on its return . Successful trails are followed by more ants , 
reinforcing better routes and gradually identifying the best path .

Ants use pheromones for more than just making trails . A crushed ant emits an alarm pheromone that sends nearby ants into an attack frenzy and attracts more ants from farther away . 
Several ant species even use  " propaganda pheromones "  to confuse enemy ants and make them fight among themselves . 
Pheromones are produced by a wide range of structures including Dufour's glands , poison glands and glands on the hindgut , pygidium , rectum , 
sternum , and hind tibia . Pheromones also are exchanged , mixed with food , and passed by trophallaxis , transferring information within the 
colony . This allows other ants to detect what task group ( e .g . , foraging or nest maintenance ) to which other colony members belong . 
In ant species with queen castes , when the dominant queen stops producing a specific pheromone , workers begin to raise new queens in the 
colony .

Some ants produce sounds by stridulation , using the gaster segments and their mandibles . Sounds may be used to communicate with colony members or with other species .

Ants attack and defend themselves by biting and , in many species , by stinging , often injecting or spraying chemicals such as formic acid . 
Bullet ants ( Paraponera ) , 
located in Central and South America , are considered to have the most painful sting of any insect , although it is usually not fatal to humans . 
This sting is given the highest rating on the Schmidt Sting Pain Index .

The sting of Jack jumper ants can be fatal , and an antivenom has been developed for it .

Fire ants , Solenopsis spp . , are unique in having a poison sac containing piperidine alkaloids . Their stings are painful and can be 
dangerous to hypersensitive people .

Trap-jaw ants of the genus Odontomachus are equipped with mandibles called trap-jaws , which snap shut faster than any other predatory appendages within the animal kingdom .
 One study of Odontomachus bauri recorded peak speeds of between 126 and 230 km/h ( 78 – 143 mph ) , with the jaws closing within 130 
microseconds on average . The ants were also observed to use their jaws as a catapult to eject intruders or fling themselves backward to escape 
a threat . Before striking , the ant opens its mandibles extremely widely and locks them in this position by an internal mechanism . 
Energy is stored in a thick band of muscle and explosively released when triggered by the stimulation of sensory organs resembling hairs 
on the inside of the mandibles . The mandibles also permit slow and fine movements for other tasks . Trap-jaws also are seen in the following 
genera: Anochetus , Orectognathus , and Strumigenys , plus some members of the Dacetini tribe , which are viewed as examples of convergent 
evolution .

A Malaysian species of ant in the Camponotus cylindricus group has enlarged mandibular glands that extend into their gaster . When disturbed , 
workers rupture the membrane of the gaster , causing a burst of secretions containing acetophenones and other chemicals that immobilise small insect attackers . The worker subsequently dies .

Suicidal defences by workers are also noted in a Brazilian ant , Forelius pusillus , where a small group of ants leaves the security of the nest after sealing the entrance from the outside each evening .

In addition to defence against predators , ants need to protect their colonies from pathogens . Some worker ants maintain the hygiene of the 
colony and their activities include undertaking or necrophory , the disposal of dead nest-mates . Oleic acid has been identified as the 
compound released from dead ants that triggers necrophoric behaviour in Atta mexicana while workers of Linepithema humile react to the 
absence of characteristic chemicals ( dolichodial and iridomyrmecin ) present on the cuticle of their living nestmates to trigger similar 
behavior .

Nests may be protected from physical threats such as flooding and overheating by elaborate nest architecture . Workers of Cataulacus muticus , an arboreal species that lives in plant hollows , respond to flooding by drinking water inside the nest , and excreting it outside . Camponotus anderseni , which nests in the cavities of wood in mangrove habitats , deals with submergence under water by switching to anaerobic respiration .