The bicycle is , in my opinion , is one of the best inventions in the world that has stood the test of time . It is a fun and speedy source of transportation , it provides valuable exercise and fresh air for your body , and the physical activity and speed of the ride helps to relax our often agitated mind .


In many countries , the use of the bicycle was traditionally the primary source of transportation . As a country develops in economic wealth , the common bicycle tends to be replaced with the car . Today we are seeing an increase in the return of the bicycle by more and more people in developed countries as environmental , health and traffic issues become prominent . There are even studies to show that out of the 20 most desirable cities to live in the world , a vast majority of them have well developed bicycle routes and communities .

Whether you do cycling for health , racing , enjoyment , or just as a way to get around , there are a few ways to get the most out of your cycling experience for both your body and your mind .

Ensure Your Heart Gets a Good Workout

Cycling is excellent for the heart . In fact regular biking each day for half an hour will reduce your risk of heart disease by as much as 50% and greatly reduce the risk of coronary heart disease and other heart problems . However you need to push yourself a little to get these results . Start slow , and build up your endurance . As you get stronger , build up your cardio with a few light hills , longer distances and regular peddling for longer periods . You don't need to go crazy , but regularly breaking into a good sweat during your cycling will do wonders for your heart and your lungs .

Another benefit that comes with pushing yourself past your normal comfort level is that it clears your head . Your energy becomes less focused on the problems of the day and more where it is needed in your body . A clear head means clear thoughts which is a sort of meditation in motion . The long term benefit is that your stress level is greatly reduced .

With that said , use common sense . If you have any health concerns , seek professional advice for any workout routine before you begin .


Have Your Seat and Handlebars Professionally Adjusted

Biking is an all around good sport for your body with very little negative impact . However like all sports or activities that put our body in a regular position on a daily basis , some caution needs to be taken to avoid any long term difficulties . You may want to take your bike down to a bike shop and have your seat and handlebars professionally adjusted for your height and body . This can give some extra support for your back , neck , shoulders and hands , which is helpful for the long term .

Your seat should ideally be level to support the weight of your body and allow you to move around on the seat when necessary . The handlebars should also not be too low or too high , too far away or too close .

Stretching before and after riding also goes a long way to helping your body stay comfortable . If you ride for long periods , take breaks and walk around a little to allow your body to stretch and experience different positions .

Ride With a Friend

Like any sport , doing it regularly can be difficult , especially in the beginning . If you ride to work , it can also be tough to turn that into a routine and avoid the temptation to take a car if you have that option . Once the habit is formed , it becomes a normal part of your daily life that you will likely love . So how do you keep the momentum going until the habit is formed ?

Riding with a friend is one of the best ways to enjoy biking and to do it regularly . You get to enjoy good company , a like minded companion , and you both depend on each other to fulfill your goals . In lack of a riding buddy , you may want to look at joining a riding group as that can always be very encouraging and rewarding .

Take Care of Your Bike

Learning to clean , maintain and even fix your bike when it breaks down is a great way to invest in your sport . It gives you a greater understanding of how your bike works and you ultimately feel more ownership towards your two wheeled vehicle . It is not hard to do home bike mechanics if you have the interest . I recommend starting with either a good bicycle repair book , or look online to learn some bicycle repair tips . Learning to clean your bike properly is the foundation for all bike maintenance . You can then begin with minor repair tricks like changing a tire and work up from there .

Good tools to start with are a hand pump , tire levers , set of Allen keys , your basic screw drivers and pliers and if you really get to know what you are doing you can look at chain tools . Investing in a quality bike repair stand will also go a long way to make your cleaning and repairs easier , and can be used to store your bike when it is not in use .

Cycling is a very positive sport for both you and the environment . Adding a few of these above tips into your riding lifestyle can go a long ways towards enriching the experience for your body and your mind .