Basketball is a sport played by two teams of five players on a rectangular court . The objective is to shoot a ball through a hoop 18 inches 
 (  46 cm  ) in diameter and 10 feet  (  3 .0 m  ) high mounted to a backboard at each end . Basketball is one of the world's most popular and widely 
viewed sports .
A team can score a field goal by shooting the ball through the basket during regular play . A field goal scores two points for the shooting team if a player is touching or closer to the 
basket than the three-point line , and three points  (  known commonly as a 3 pointer or three  ) if the player is behind the three-point line . 
The team with the most points at the end of the game wins , but additional time  (  overtime  ) may be issued when the game ends with a draw . 
The ball can be advanced on the court by bouncing it while walking or running or throwing it to a team mate . It is a violation to move 
without dribbling the ball , to carry it , or to hold the ball with both hands then resume dribbling .

Violations are called  " fouls "  . A personal foul is penalized , and a free throw is usually awarded to an offensive player if he is fouled while shooting the ball . A technical foul may also be issued 
when certain infractions occur , most commonly for unsportsmanlike conduct on the part of a player or coach . A technical foul gives the opposing team a free throw , and the opposing team also retains possession of the ball .

As well as many techniques for shooting , passing , dribbling and rebounding , basketball has specialized player positions and offensive and defensive structures  (  player positioning  ) . 
Typically , the tallest members of a team will play  " center "  ,  " power forward "  or  " small forward "  positions , while shorter players or those who possess the best ball handling skills and speed play  " point guard "  or  " shooting guard "  .

Basketball is the number one fastest growing sport in the US . It is a teamwork game and usually requires you to be attentive , and , obviously , 
active . You can play basketball with basic skills but to be a great player , there is more work and patience to be involved . You also have to be 
active and quick to make good plays . You have to square up your shoulders to the basket to get a good shot . When you shoot  (  not a lay-up  ) you 
should have you pointer finger pointing right at the basket .

Stretch . The introduction of every sport should be stretching . Walk 400 meters , run 400 meters , then walk 400 meters . Do anything - just get 
those muscles running . You don't want to twist your ankle because of running too fast or stretch a leg muscle for sprinting .

Learn the basic rules of a basketball game and how to play . This includes knowing when it is a foul , understanding when it is a double dribble , 
how to dribble , shoot , rebound , etc . You can look this up in Google , ask a basketball coach , find a good basketball player who'd be willing to 
teach you , watch videos , etc . You may want to find someone who's better in basketball and can explain it to you in real though , as that usually 
cuts the time where you have to try and figure it out all by yourself .

Train and challenge yourself . Dribble , shoot , rebound , etc . Be your own coach - get on that court and practice ! Don't be discouraged when you 
watch a good basketball player - watch and learn from them ! Dribble around the court - learn how to dribble faster , slower , throw the ball in 
the air and catch it , shoot from different spots in a court , improve your shooting skills .

Practice with other basketball players . Learn what 'rock' , 'paint' , 'chain' and the other terms mean , and use them on a regular basis . 
You must be natural with it . Practice it into your daily game-play .

Learn on how to work as a team . Be a good team player . Pass more often , run for an open space to help that guy being surrounded by the opposite team , 
help block , help with rebounds , etc . People will like you and will return you the favor !

Adopt new tricks . Watch other players , watch more basketball games , search YouTube , look on Google , watch basketball on TV , ask a friend to show you a few nice tricks , 
and moves etc . Start from the more common tricks and travel from there to the rarest and nastiest . Remember to be patient and keep practicing 
until you get it , don't just give up ! That just proves your lack of determination . Get out and play !

Play basketball everyday or every other day . Play more often . Have a sense of dedication to the game and learn to be patient . Not every player you'll play with will be nice , play fair , treat you nice , etc . 
You won't be able to shoot accurately even after a month or two of practice , learn how to dribble without double dribbling , etc .

Play with others . As a player you should know what you would be competing against . Play with people your age . If you fail , practice harder or play with people younger than you  (  if you are a young person  ) . Once you start playing again , 
you're play mates will see the improvements you've made .

DRIBBLE ! The only way to succeed in basketball is by dribbling . You could be the best shooter on earth , but without knowing how to dribble , it would be 
very hard to be a good player . And by learning to dribble , that doesn't mean you should only know the basics , but you should advance in dribbling . 
Point guards and shooting guards like Kobe Bryant are great at shooting , but the only way he could even get his shots off is by maneuvering his opponent . 
If you want to be a good player , it all starts by practicing you're dribbling .

Measurements and time limits discussed in this section often vary among tournaments and organizations; international and NBA rules are used in this section.

The object of the game is to outscore one's opponents by throwing the ball through the opponents' basket from above while preventing the 
opponents from doing so on their own. An attempt to score in this way is called a shot. A successful shot is worth two points, or three points if it is taken 
from beyond the three-point arc which is 6.75 metres ( 22 ft 2 in ) from the basket in international games and 23 feet 9 inches ( 7.24 m ) in NBA games. A one-point shot can be earned when shooting from the foul line after a foul is made.

Playing regulations
Games are played in four quarters of 10 ( FIBA ) or 12 minutes ( NBA ) . College games use two 20-minute halves , while United States 
high school varsity games use 8 minute quarters . 15 minutes are allowed for a half-time break under FIBA , NBA , and NCAA rules and 10 minutes in United States high schools . 
Overtime periods are five minutes in length except for high school which is four minutes in length . Teams exchange baskets for the second half . The time allowed is actual playing time; the clock is stopped while the play is not active . 
Therefore , games generally take much longer to complete than the allotted game time , typically about two hours .

Five players from each team may be on the court at one time . Substitutions are unlimited but can only be done when play is stopped . 
Teams also have a coach , who oversees the development and strategies of the team , and other team personnel such as assistant coaches , 
managers , statisticians , doctors and trainers .

For both men's and women's teams , a standard uniform consists of a pair of shorts and a jersey with a clearly visible number , unique within 
the team , printed on both the front and back . Players wear high-top sneakers that provide extra ankle support . Typically , team names , players' names and , outside of North America , sponsors are printed on the uniforms .

A limited number of time-outs , clock stoppages requested by a coach ( or sometimes mandated in the NBA ) for a short meeting with the players , 
are allowed . They generally last no longer than one minute ( 100 seconds in the NBA ) unless , for televised games , a commercial break is needed .

The game is controlled by the officials consisting of the referee ( referred to as crew chief in the NBA ) , one or two umpires ( referred to as 
referees in the NBA  ) and the table officials . For college , the NBA , and many high schools , there are a total of three referees on the court . 
The table officials are responsible for keeping track of each teams scoring , timekeeping , individual and team fouls , player substitutions , 
team possession arrow , and the shot clock .

